That's fascinating now, um, another,
I really wanted to talk to you about is something that you brought up, uh,
when you sent the notes to Matt, uh, was, um, censorship and that,
and, and, and self censorship, which is going on apparently in writer, groups,
and,
and groups of people that are deciding that certain words eliminated
from a vocabulary and from vernacular,
and that you shouldn't discuss certain things anymore.
These things are it's harming fiction and harming literature that
you can't explore the darker ideas.
You know? Oh, you wanna see me crucify myself right now?
Yeah. Okay. <laugh> this is kinda the career ending moment
for, uh, for several years, I was in a writer's workshop and,
uh, the core group of us had been meeting since 1990.
So this is a workshop that was almost 30 years old,
and gradually people
were asking each other, not to use certain words. Uh,
first, you know, nobody really used the N word,
but it was definitely a word you could not bring to workshop.
And then in a story, I used the word and a very good friend of mine said,
you're not bringing that word into workshop.
You're not writing anything with the F word. And,
and it just became more and more tightly stricted that way.
And so eventually I realized we were kind of writing to him,
make each other happy instead of, to kind of confront each other.
And, uh, one of the writers in our workshop is a writer named Cheryl Strait,
who, who had written book called wild, which was a hugely successful book.
It was chosen as an Oprah book and it will be on book store shelves for the rest
of history, Cheryl's book wild. But while she was writing it,
she had written a segment about how, as a child,
she would be sat on the sofa with her and father and her
grandfather taught her how to him. And so as a child,
she would her grandfather until he achieved orgasm.
And then later she would find these featherless
featherless birds that had fallen out of a nest and she picked
one up and she knew it would die.
So she crushed it between her bare hands. This is a very small child.
And she wrote how as that bird died crushed between her
hands. It its death rows,
its spasms of death felt exactly like her grandfather's penis
in her little hand. Whoa,
that was the best thing she ever wrote.
And her editor at Koff said that is not going in this book
because we want this book to be a big book.
And if we see you jerking off your grandfather and then killing baby birds,
that is not gonna make Oprah Winfrey happy.
So it was a magnificent piece of writing and a magnificent kind of parallel
awareness for a child to have.
And this juxtaposition of sexual abuse and death was magnificent.
Oh my God, it worked on every level. But the publisher said,
this is not gonna be in the book.
Did she send it to you? Or did she show.
It to you? She brought it to workshop and she read it.
And there was even a newspaper reporter pre uh,
present her and we all realized it was fantastically powerful,
but then she said, uh, they won't take this, this can't go in.
Wow. Did she do anything with it? Did she publish it online or.
No? And there were so many parts of that book.
There were so much better than what the, they actually did publish really.
And so it's that kind of censorship where you're trying to reach
a reader standing in line at Starbucks. And this has gotta go in that,
uh, point of purchase stand and it's gotta be a face out.
And I understand for a long time, if you wanted a face out yet, uh, Barnes,
a noble, especially on the discover new writers face out stack,
you could not have the word on the first page because they did not want people
picking up that book and opening it and seeing the F word that,
that just did not fit their corporate culture. And so, you know,
so much of the censorship is because people really wanna reach the largest
audience, uh, without offending people.
But there's giant problems with that. Right? I mean,
one of the more fascinating things about books is that the story plays out in
your mind.
It exactly the nature of consumption makes it about the only medium,
which in which you can go to those places.
Yeah. Literally you, you couldn't,
there's no way you would be able to find,
to put that in a book, her story about a grandfather and the bird.
Maybe you could put the bird in, but the grandfather part there's no, no way.
Yeah. And I, I, I, I feel like I'm telling stories outta school,
but it's such a perfect example of that kind of self censorship. Uh,
and it's also something so magnificent that I feel it should come out.
It should sort of be stated, uh, I don't wanna steal her thunder. I,
I wanted to honor the story, but it's like so many stories that people tell me,
uh, I'm kind of seen as a safe person, you know,
kind of a degraded monster maybe,
but as a degraded monster with no self-esteem whatsoever,
they feel safe telling me these things because in a way they,
they probably feel a little morally superior to me. <laugh>.
Um, why do you think people would consider you a degraded monster? Because I.
Can read a story like guts that is so
completely humiliating because as I read it, it's in the first person.
So people more or less assume that it's my story.
Even though it's story garnered from many different people,
but the fact that I'm presenting,
it means that I'm the person that is this losing face.
And afterwards people feel like they can risk losing by telling me their story.
That's very much like, uh, the gut story. So.
When someone is writing something that's deeply disturbing like that. When you,
when you, when you hit those parts of your mind and you come to this pathway,
do, do you consider, do you say, well,
no one's ever gonna allow this to be in a book. No one's ever.
Do you consider those thoughts or do you just go through with it
first and then review it or do you not do that at all?
You.
Know, I, my formative years with a punk years, the seventies into the eighties,
and we always used to have a saying, people would say, uh,
don't hit the break until you hear a glass break or don't stop until you hear
last break.
And so I always think the point of writing is to coach yourself
to that point that you would never have gone voluntarily
and also to coach a reader to a point where the reader would never have gone
voluntarily in a story like guts. You know, it's very funny on the front end.
And if you told people on the front end where it was gonna go,
they'd never read that story,
but it's very funny and charming and well-paced on the front.
And then once people realize where it's gonna go,
they're already trapped <laugh>. And so in a way, it's,
it's a way.
You seem to enjoy that though.
You like the way you said they're already trapped,
you seem to take some satisfaction in that.
But in writing it,
I'm also sort of springing the trap on myself. Mm.
Starting down a path that I have,
no idea is gonna be so humiliating or so, uh,
emotionally upsetting or so dark. Because if, if I did,
I would never go go down that path.
When you write a story like that, how much of a do you plan out in advance?
I might plan out up to the, the end of the second act, you know,
at the moment of greatest crisis, this will happen, you know, in fight club.
The moment of greatest crisis is gonna be when everyone in the support groups
figures out that this guy is lying to them.
And they're all given the choice of either accepting him for his
transgressions or rejecting him, same thing in choke.
There's gonna be that moment in, uh,
when people realize that he has faked choking and that he's made them
into a fake hero and they're gonna either kill him or
accept him.
And so I typically know that the second act is gonna end with a
transgresion being revealed. But beyond that,
I don't want to know because I want the story to complete itself with its own
momentum at that point. And if it doesn't surprise me beyond the second act,
then it's not gonna surprise the reader.
Do you write, do you have like a storyboard laid out and do you,
do you use like index cards or anything to figure out where things are going or
do you just kind of no.
No. You know, that's part of the glory is that whenever I get stuck,
I go to the gym and I say, okay,
this I'm working on this scene where this happens and this happens.
And this happens. And my friends will say,
they'll always be somebody there with a really fresh take and life experience
who can say, have you thought about this happening?
And it will take the story in a direction that is so unexpected because it's
not from my experience and that that's the glory.
And they feel like they've contributed they're, they're so happy. And, uh,
and I'm happy to spend time among people.
And I'm happy to have the story complete in a way that I never,
ever could have anticipated.
That's fascinating. So you do it at the gym.
Yeah. The gym is really great because you're around people and you have these
recoveries between sets. So you have a little time to talk.
And at the same time you have during the exercise itself,
you have time to think.
And so it paces the talking versus the thinking,
and it's also kind of highly oxygenated and it's physically active.
And your mind is kind of, you know, mind is not engaged with something else.
Your mind is kind of disengaged like it is while you're taking a shower. Yeah.
A lot of people like to walk, they like to read, uh, write,
read a little bit of it and then walk and bring a recorder or their phone to
record on think probably along the same lines. Charles.
Dickens walked somewhere between 12 and 20 miles a day,
as he wrote whoa. And the, uh, the Lakeland poets walked constantly.
I mean, walking is a big part of writing.
Anything physical, right? Like anything you're forcing your body to move,
forcing the blood.
To flow and, and also mindless mm-hmm <affirmative>.
So it allows your mind to wander. Yeah.